logo
HOME
BLOG
ABOUT
CONTACT US
Home » Blog » How To » How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio – Separate Vocals From Song


How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio – Separate Vocals From Song
August 28, 2020 Esefa Trobis How To 0

How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio- Separate Vocals From Song
FL (Fruity Loops) Studio needs no introduction when you are talking about software for creating enigmatic music pieces. Whether you are adding different instrumental music together or altering the vocals of a song, this audio mixing software gives you features and controls to modify any audio track. One of the most searched queries by musicians for this software is “how to separate vocals from a song FL studio.” The process of removing vocals from a track using a process known as phase cancellation. In this, you work with reverse polarity fl studio, where the switching of the left audio channel with the right to you achieve the inverting phase. A few tweaks here and there, and you will perform removal of the vocals from any track leaving just the mix of instruments in a song.


How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio
How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio

If you are creating a mashup and need to remove vocals from songs, then this guide is for you. Follow each step to isolate vocals on FL Studio with phase cancellation technique. We might not guarantee the quality of music that will remain after the words will get removed. When you remove vocal, the music is susceptible to bleed but if you are up for the risk then keep on reading below:

Step 1: Uploading the Track:
Open the FL studio and click on the Playlist button located on the upper-right corner of the screen. Drag the song from the audio player, or you can also select the track from the file located on your computer. Once the song is selected, it will be visible on the playlist window.

Step 2: Loading the Song on Mixer:
Once your desired track gets imported, click on the “Mixer” icon located on the upper-right corner of the main window. Now send the song from the input track chain to the mixer window at track two chain. For this, you need to click a small “X” button at the button of each track chain.

Step 3: Working on Effects Windows:
Now select Track 2 and open the effect windows to access different effects that will affect the sound and vocals intensity. Choose the “Fruity Stereo Shaper” effect for your song.

Step 4: Altering the Sliders:
Now, click on the right and left slider, and drag them to -1 position. Now select another effects slot using the drop-down arrow for track two and click on the option “Maximus.” You now see a pop up in another window, choose “Low” in the Maximus window, and select the “Mute” button. Make sure to turn off the “Comp On” button to remove track compression.

Step 5: Work on the Effects:
To select the “Track 3” chain, select the “X” button on the bottom side of the window. By clicking on the drop arrow, you will be able to see the effects. Choose the “Maximus” effect for the track. On the second Maximus window, click “Mid” and, in the end, select the “Mute” button. You will be able to see a button “Comp On” in the second Maximus window, so turned off.

Step 6: Do the Tweaks:
For effective removal of vocals without distorting to music, you have to make some additional adjustments. Access the dashboard on the upper-right corner toolbar to launch it on the main screen. Click on the “Option” on the upper-left corner to select “Add Control,” “Gray Shiny,” and “Wheel” to transfer them on a custom control knob. Select “Gray Shiny” on a second control knob. On the first knob, edit to write the word “Low” and “High” on the second knob. These are essential tweaks, and renaming them will help you understand the necessary change in frequency to remove the vocals.

Step 7: Extracting Vocals:
As you have all the knobs on the main window, it’s time to use them to extract the vocals from the track. Right-click on “Low” Knob then select “Create Automation Clip” from the first Maximus window. Now click the box tagged as none and select “Dashboard Wheel 1.” Do the same process with the “Low” knob in the second Maximus window. Once this is over, we will be working on “High Knob.” Right-click on “High” Knob and select “Create Automation Clip.” Now take the cursor to box “none” using a drop arrow to select “Dashboard Wheel 2.” Repeat the process on the second Maximus window for the high knob.

Step 8: Removal of Vocal:
Now when you play the rack, turn the “Low” knob seen on the dashboard to remove vocals. To even the pitch in the track, you need to tweak the “Low Knob” till you hear only music in the song.

Remember, isolating vocals using phase cancellation on FL Studio is tedious work, but it does the job. Still, there is no guarantee that the music will be appealing, and the final result depends on your tweaking techniques. Another factor that affects the edited tack is the quality of the file used for editing. The sound may bleed, or the instrument used is the song might become loud or shrill for ears. So, I hope our “How to Isolate Vocals in FL Studio” article helped you do something creative with your music track.


About Esefa Trobis  34 Articles
I am Esefa. I am Professional Writer. I love to write on music and related to orchestra software. If you want to know more information about music, then check my website.
How to Export Stems in FL Studio- Export Individual Tracks
PREVIOUS
How to Export Stems in FL Studio-Export Individual Tracks

Ableton Live Lite vs Intro vs Standard
NEXT
Ableton Live Lite vs Intro vs Standard – Which is the right choice?

BE THE FIRST TO COMMENT
Leave a Reply
Your email address will not be published.

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

BEST ORCHESTRAL VST

© 2017 Best orchestral VSTDisclaimer | Privacy | Contact